README.md, before:

# NPS Active Space

An ***active space*** is a well-known concept in bioacoustics ([Marten and Marler 1977](https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/4599136.pdf)). It represents a geographic volume whose radii correspond to the limit of audibility for a specific signal. In other words, an active space provides an answer to the question, *"how far can you hear a given sound at a specific place on Earth's surface?"*

This repository is designed to estimate active spaces for fixed-wing aircraft noise within the U.S. National Park System. Aircraft are powerful noise sources audible over vast areas. Thus [considerable NPS management efforts have focused on protecting natural quietude from aviation noise](https://www.nps.gov/subjects/sound/overflights.htm). `NPS-ActiveSpace` provides a quantitative tool to support managers in monitoring park resource condition. 

Consider an example active space, below. It was computed using data from a long term acoustic monitoring site in Denali National Park, DENAUWBT Upper West Branch Toklat ([Withers 2012](https://irma.nps.gov/DataStore/Reference/Profile/2184396)). The bold black polygon delineates an active space estimate for flights at 3000 meters altitude. Points interior to the polygon are predicted to be audible, those exterior inaudible. <br> 

Superposed over the polygon are colored flight track polylines. `NPS-ActiveSpace` includes an application that leverages the acoustic record to ground-truth audibility of co-variate vehicle tracks from GPS databases. Ground-truthing is used to "tune" an active space to the appropriate geographic extent.<br>
<br>
<img src="https://github.com/dbetchkal/NPS-ActiveSpace/blob/v2/nps_active_space/img/NPS-ActiveSpace_example.png" alt="active space polygon example" width="300">


## Packages

This project is made up for four packages:

`utils`: diverse utilities - file I/O, geoprocessing computations, acoustic propagation modelling, and detection statistics
    
`ground-truthing`: a `tkinter`-based ground-truthing application

`active-space`: generate and tune active space polygons

`analysis`: estimate acoustic metrics from the intersection of an active space polygon and vehicle tracks

Also included are noise source [data](https://github.com/dbetchkal/NPS-ActiveSpace/tree/v2/nps_active_space/data) for tuning active space polygons.

## License

**Authors**: <br>Kirby Heck<br>Adina Zucker<br>Davyd Halyn Betchkal

### Public domain

This project is in the worldwide [public domain](LICENSE.md):

> This project is in the public domain within the United States,
> and copyright and related rights in the work worldwide are waived through the
> [CC0 1.0 Universal public domain dedication](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
>
> All contributions to this project will be released under the CC0 dedication.
> By submitting a pull request, you are agreeing to comply with this waiver of copyright interest.

Commit message:

Add order of operations to NPS-ActiveSpace README

README.md, after:

# NPS Active Space

An ***active space*** is a well-known concept in bioacoustics ([Marten and Marler 1977](https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/4599136.pdf)). It represents a geographic volume whose radii correspond to the limit of audibility for a specific signal. In other words, an active space provides an answer to the question, *"how far can you hear a given sound at a specific place on Earth's surface?"*

This repository is designed to estimate active spaces for fixed-wing aircraft noise within the U.S. National Park System. Aircraft are powerful noise sources audible over vast areas. Thus [considerable NPS management efforts have focused on protecting natural quietude from aviation noise](https://www.nps.gov/subjects/sound/overflights.htm). `NPS-ActiveSpace` provides a quantitative tool to support managers in monitoring park resource condition. 

Consider an example active space, below. It was computed using data from a long term acoustic monitoring site in Denali National Park, DENAUWBT Upper West Branch Toklat ([Withers 2012](https://irma.nps.gov/DataStore/Reference/Profile/2184396)). The bold black polygon delineates an active space estimate for flights at 3000 meters altitude. Points interior to the polygon are predicted to be audible, those exterior inaudible. <br> 

Superposed over the polygon are colored flight track polylines. `NPS-ActiveSpace` includes an application that leverages the acoustic record to ground-truth audibility of co-variate vehicle tracks from GPS databases. Ground-truthing is used to "tune" an active space to the appropriate geographic extent.<br>
<br>
<img src="https://github.com/dbetchkal/NPS-ActiveSpace/blob/v2/nps_active_space/img/NPS-ActiveSpace_example.png" alt="active space polygon example" width="300">


## Packages

This project is made up of four packages:

`utils`: diverse utilities - file I/O, geoprocessing computations, acoustic propagation modelling, and detection statistics
    
`ground-truthing`: a `tkinter`-based ground-truthing application

`active-space`: generate and tune active space polygons

`analysis`: estimate acoustic metrics from the intersection of an active space polygon and vehicle tracks

Also included are noise source [data](https://github.com/dbetchkal/NPS-ActiveSpace/tree/v2/nps_active_space/data) for tuning active space polygons.

***For more specific information on each package, view their individual READMEs.***

## Order of Operations

While each package can be used and run individually, the project was designed so that outputs of one package work seamlessly as the inputs for another. 

Packages were designed to be run in the following order:

1. `ground-truthing`
2. `active-space`
3. `analysis`

## License

**Authors**: <br>Kirby Heck<br>Adina Zucker<br>Davyd Halyn Betchkal

### Public domain

This project is in the worldwide [public domain](LICENSE.md):

> This project is in the public domain within the United States,
> and copyright and related rights in the work worldwide are waived through the
> [CC0 1.0 Universal public domain dedication](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
>
> All contributions to this project will be released under the CC0 dedication.
> By submitting a pull request, you are agreeing to comply with this waiver of copyright interest.
